---
layout: single
title: The BIM Effect
permalink: BIM-effect
header:
  overlay_image: /assets/img/Lawrence,_Kansas_skyline_2018.jpg
  overlay_color: "#000"
  overlay_filter: "0.5"
  #overlay_image: /assets/images/unsplash-image-1.jpg
  # actions:
  #   - label: "Download"
  #     url: "https://github.com/mmistakes/minimal-mistakes/"
  caption: "Photo credit: Ian Ballinger"
---
<h2>The BIM Effect by Noor Saeed</h2>
<p>Sitting at my desk, frustrated at the sight ahead of me. I stare at an error screen on the monitor after working on a project for 3 hours that day. I sit back and think, what was architecture like before this program on my screen existed?</p
<p>Throughout History, architecture has been an innately human skill. Utilizing artistic values and human excellence has allowed humanity to envision and develop functional and beautiful buildings. For centuries, an architect’s only tools were sketchbooks, pencils, and a scale, allowing for direct imagination onto paper. But, within the last 30 years, the introduction of the Building Information Modeling (BIM) software has transformed the way buildings are designed, both in the professional world and in the classroom. Programs like Revit, Rhino, and Grasshopper are now the center of architecture students' education, raising important questions about how digital tools impact creativity. In order to understand this radical change, it is important to see how BIMs gained their place, how they compare to traditional methods, and what their pros and cons are. </p>
<p>Building Information Modeling (BIM), is much more in depth than traditional digital drafting systems. Unlike previously older CAD programs, BIM directly links data to the model. A wall drawn in Revit is not just a flat line or shape, it carries information about thickness, material, and even thermo dynamics. This makes BIM a super powerful tool merging design and construction. </p>
<p>The introduction of BIM can be traced back to the 90s, when firms began adopting these programs to improve accuracy and efficiency. By the 2000s, universities had also adopted these programs into their curriculums to better prepare students for real world practice. Today, most architecture firms expect students to graduate with a minimum of a basic proficiency in Revit or Rhino. As Cheshire explains in WIRED, BIM became popular because it functions like “Google Docs for Buildings,” allowing multiple people to work on the same model at once (Cheshire). These powers made it super attractive to firms and unavoidable for schools. </p>
<p>Despite its popularity today, BIM cannot fully replicate what happens when a designer sketches by hand. Hand drawing has always allowed the flow of ideas straight from thought to paper. The accessibility and looseness of sketching often sparks ideas. Personally, when I am in the preliminary stages of designing a new building, the sketching process sparks the most creativity. </p>
<p>The tools on BIMs are precise, structured, and defined by parameters. Tools like Revit and Rhino make it possible to rotate models, measure angles, and easily spot errors. However, this way of working encourages designers to think in terms of rules rather than creativity. As Jeanne Homer argues, professors often encourage students to combine sketching with BIM since relying on software alone risks losing that spontaneous spark, “Sketching and overlays on schematic mass models can keep students connected to the imaginative freedom of drawing, even while working inside Revit’s digital framework” (Homer). This shows how the best results come from blending both of these methods, instead of relying on just one. Including the best of both worlds, relying on human creativity and technological ingenuity. </p>
<p>While BIM may limit creativity, its strengths are undeniable. It saves time by allowing multiple people to work on the same project at once. It also allows for complicated analysis, like sustainability analysis and structural simulations, helping students understand how their buildings would perform. As Cheshire explained, this is why Bim is so widely adopted (Cheshire). For students, learning these programs means learning exactly what they will be doing in the real world. </p>
<p>While its strengths are there, its weaknesses are just as real. The steep learning curve can easily overwhelm students, forcing them to spend hours on technical problems instead of actual design exploration. Its reliance on component libraries enables students to produce ‘cookie-cutter’ results, where students produce buildings that are extremely similar to others due to them using preloaded walls, windows, and textures. Most importantly, the precision of BIM limits the freedom of early experimentation within designers. A blank paper invites the designer to be playful and use creativity, but a blank Revit file forces the designer to use dimensions before the first line can appear. As Sosna and Vochozka’s study shows, digital modeling can enhance creativity in spatial thinking, but only if the tools are taught as exploratory and not rigid, they argue that “the way 3D modeling tools are used significantly influences creative ability, especially in spatial imagination” (Sosna and Vochozka). This furthers the idea that BIM is not inherently limiting, but depends on how the teacher frames the software for students. If students are encouraged to use BIM as a medium for testing ideas instead of just producing finished polished models, then the creativity benefits the limits. </p>
<hr>
<p>Personally, using BIMs has shaped the way I understand architecture, mainly since it's been the only framework I have known learning architecture in. I have never taken a studio class without BIMs being the center of the process. On one hand, this gives me confidence in using these tools, but on the other it makes me think more procedurally instead of creatively. Yet, I have always followed a refined method of sketching on paper first before creating things on revit. Even with this method, I always felt boxed in while on BIMs, as my boundaries and limits are the tools that the program supports. For example, in my Civil Engineering & Architecture class, my group designed a library. My first sketches had playful shapes, but once we moved into Revit, that idea died as it was too complicated in the geometry of the program and we could not be bothered to figure it out. This struggle also highlights BIMs broader cultural meaning. Architecture is no longer just about artistry and creativity, it reflects society's obsession with precision, data, and efficiency. Bim represents those values and students absorb them in their education. </p>
<p>BIM has become unavoidable in architecture, both in classrooms and in the work place. Its advantages include collaboration, precision, and efficiency, which all make it an essential tool. Yet, it also introduces challenges, especially when creativity is funneled through rigid software structures. The best students are the ones who can do both. Using the creativity of sketches and then refining the ideas using BIM. As Homer emphasizes, Revit can be a creative medium when paired with sketching (Homer). The end result is not the death of creativity but its reshaping. For architecture students BIM isn’t the replacement of imagination, but instead it's a new lens through which ideas are brought to life.</p>
<p>BIM may never replace pencil sketches, but it reshapes how that sketch exists in a world obsessed with efficiency and precision. To me, it represents something bigger than architecture, it shows how human creativity can mold to whatever we need it to. Maybe that’s what it means to design in the Anthropocene. Learning to not just build structures, but to live combining design and modernity. I rate BIMs a 3.5. </p>
<h3>Works Cited</h3>

<p>Cheshire, Tom. “BIM Is Changing Architecture - Not Necessarily for the Better.” WIRED, 10 Jan. 2017, www.wired.com/story/architecture-software-creativity/ Accessed 4 Sept. 2025.</p>
<p>Homer, Jeanne. “Revit as a Creative Medium?” Academia.edu, 4 July 2014, www.academia.edu/7555764/Revit_as_a_Creative_Medium. Accessed 4 Sept. 2025.</p>
<p>Sosna, Tomáš, et al. “Developing Pupils’ Creativity through 3D Modeling: An Experimental Study.” Frontiers in Education, vol. 10, 25 June 2025, https://doi.org/10.3389/feduc.2025.1583877. Accessed 4 Sept. 2025.</p>
