---
layout: single
title: Past, Present, and Future
permalink: past-present-future
header:
  overlay_image: /assets/img/Lawrence,_Kansas_skyline_2018.jpg
  overlay_color: "#000"
  overlay_filter: "0.5"
  #overlay_image: /assets/images/unsplash-image-1.jpg
  # actions:
  #   - label: "Download"
  #     url: "https://github.com/mmistakes/minimal-mistakes/"
  caption: "Photo credit: Ian Ballinger"
---
<h2>Past, Present, and Future by Sarah Blake</h2>
<p>I never quite understood the importance of family heirlooms until this past year when two of my grandparents passed away. Their loss was very hard for my family and it made me reflect on their lives and reminisce about all of the amazing memories I shared with them and that still live on in my family. I realized that when I think of my grandparents, I don’t think of material items but instead of the traditions, faith, stories, and memories that united us as a family. In this essay, I will explore the topic of heirlooms and the meaning behind the items, traditions, and memories they represent.</p>
<p>Heirlooms are items or traditions passed down through families that hold deep meaning. The word “loom” stems from a root word which once referred to the old expectation that a familial inheritance will include practical tools, such as looms (Proulx). Heirlooms look different for every family but they are mostly objects that act as "little windows into the past” for families (Thomann). However, not all heirlooms are just old objects; they are also traditions and stories that keep loved ones alive in our hearts. As one author stated, it's not “the object that we want to preserve, it is the memories” (More than Grand). By preserving the history of the item, it takes the attention away from the monetary value of the object and instead passes on the memories it holds. </p>
<p>In today's world, it is easy to think that younger generations don't value heirlooms as deeply as older generations do. Many young people may not know the full story behind the object or tradition, and as a result, they may view these items and associate them more with monetary value rather than the history and meaning they carry. However, passing down heirlooms throughout generations is more than just giving the object to a person- it's about preserving family memories. As an author writes, it is important to “make sure you are sharing the stories” about the heirlooms, because “there’s no better way to build on your family legacy” (More than Grand). By sharing the stories, it ensures that the item carries much more value than money or its appearance. It is easy for families to be caught up in the material value of heirlooms, which can create much tension in a family. In some cases, disagreements arise over who should inherit an item or its worth which can strain relationships. Yet, in other families it can bring them together to create a sense of unity to a particular person. Communicating about the significance of the heirloom helps families focus on the real meaning of the heirloom. As Lauren Tomann writes, heirlooms “can serve as conversation starters and help to spark meaningful conversations between family members” and they can “help to foster a sense of unity and belonging within a family” (Thomann). Coming back to the history of the item could unite a family if there is tension. </p>
<hr>
<p>I have vivid memories of going through my grandma's jewelry box when I was younger. I would sneak into her wooden jewelry box with my sisters and put on a few rings and necklaces, hurrying to put them away before she caught us. One day, she caught us. Instead of being upset, she smiled and asked if we liked her jewelry. When we all nodded, she promised each of us that we would all receive something from her box one day. She let us all choose an item which she saved for us until her passing. The ring I chose is very special to me because it reminds me of her every time I wear it. It had belonged to her mother who passed it onto my grandma on her wedding day as her “something blue”. Now the ring is my connection to the generations of the strong women in my family. </p><p>Traditions in my family are considered heirlooms to me. Every Christmas Eve, my entire extended family gathers in Kentucky to eat food, sing carols, and watch Santa bring presents to the kids. This tradition was started by my grandparents almost eighty years ago and still continues today. As I wore my grandmother's ring last Christmas, I felt my grandparents' presence even though they were no longer there in person. The small tradition they started years ago continues to bring our family together just as they'd hoped. </p> 
<p>Some heirlooms are not physical objects but come from experiences with that person. My grandpa loved playing cards so from a young age he taught me how to play games like slap jack and old maid. He would always win so I tried to cheat in order to beat him. He always caught me cheating and we laughed about it endlessly. At the time, it wasn’t the cards that I cherished the most, it was the time we shared together. Now, when I play cards it reminds me of him and I think of him telling me not to cheat. </p>
<p>One of the most important heirlooms that my grandparents passed down through generations in my family, is my faith. They lived their lives with kindness, generosity, and selflessness. I realised from an early age that it was their faith that was the reason for those qualities. They instilled the same traits in their children and grandchildren which has left us with something more meaningful than an object. 	</p>
<p>In the end, when I think of my grandparents, I don't think of material goods, I think of the memories we shared that united us. Heirlooms, whether it be objects, traditions, or life lessons, are reminders of the important people in our lives and who we love. Each heirloom is a way for me to pass my grandparents' memory on to future generations. Objects come and go but memories never fade. I think Lauren Thomann sums it up well in her article: The Meaning of Family Heirlooms when she states “One of the most valuable things about family heirlooms is the way they preserve our memories of our ancestors. These items can be physical reminders of important events and people in our family’s history” (Thomann). </p>
<p>I give family heirlooms four and a half stars. </p>

<h3>Works Cited</h3>
<p>“More than Grand.” More than Grand, 16 Sept. 2021, www.morethangrand.com/blog/the-power-of-family-heirlooms. Accessed 1 Sept. 2025</p>
<p>Proulx, Natalie. “Do You Have Any Family Heirlooms?” The New York Times, 30 Nov. 2022, www.nytimes.com/2022/11/30/learning/do-you-have-any-family-heirlooms.html. Accessed 1 Sept. 2025.</p>
<p>Thomann, Lauren. “The Meaning of Family Heirlooms: Connecting Past and Present.” Heirlooms at Home, 9 Dec. 2022, www.heirloomsathome.com/the-meaning-of-family-heirlooms-connecting-past-and-present/. Accessed 1 Sept. 2025.</p>
