---
layout: single
title: Legacy of Teddy Bears: Hunting to Hugging
permalink: teddy-bears
header:
  overlay_image: /assets/img/Lawrence,_Kansas_skyline_2018.jpg
  overlay_color: "#000"
  overlay_filter: "0.5"
  #overlay_image: /assets/images/unsplash-image-1.jpg
  # actions:
  #   - label: "Download"
  #     url: "https://github.com/mmistakes/minimal-mistakes/"
  caption: "Photo credit: Ian Ballinger"
---
<h2>Legacy of Teddy Bears: Hunting to Hugging by Clara De Stefano</h2>

<p>Over an hour into my drive home from my family vacation spot, lake long lodge, my 6 year old head slipped as I laid flush against the cold window. No where to be found, my teddy bear sat lonely on our abandoned resort rooms floor. Call after call, my mom begged for them to “please look out for it” and “keep us updated”. In the meantime, it was replaced with a new one, soft and fluffy coming right off the shelf. Sickly, I slept with my face against this fraudulent stuffed animal as my mom sent a prayer to Saint Anthony. Two depressing weeks later, a cardboard box wrapped in packing tape showed up on my home welcome mat. My scraggly teddy bear was crammed inside with its pink floral patterned feet and bow. The weight on my shoulders quickly disappeared; all my anxieties settled. For as long as I can remember, I’ve owned my raggedy teddy bear. Gifted to me as a baby, “teddy” has been with me through my greatest days and saddest moments. While to me it’s a cuddly creature my head habitually rests on most nights, bears haven't always been represented that way. Once feared and hunted, the ideas and perceptions surrounding them have changed greatly over time. A newfound comfort, innocence and cultural connection was created and the existence of the teddy bear turned to significantly influence historical ideas, social marketing, and individuals' daily lives. </p>
<p>Before the evolution of the teddy bear, bears in general were feared and seen as violent. In November of 1902, Theordore Roosevelt set off “near Onward, Mississippi” (Holzmann, 2025) joining others in a bear hunt where he failed. His assistants ended up taking over, tying the bear to a tree nearby where Roosevelt soon decided not to shoot. The public heard of this occurrence, shifting the fearful ideas into cute ones through a comic. Bears became viewed as vulnerable through the artwork of “editorial cartoonist Clifford K. Berryman” (George, 2023), and the bear plush transpired. Morris Michtom, a candy store owner, along with his wife marketed and named the stuffed animal after Theodore, creating the teddy bear. While some transpired negative ideas about them including fears that animal toys could replace “the female urge to nurture babies” (George, 2023), others fell into the popularity and love for the bear. Roosevelt even used it within his reelection campaign, further influencing communities in the nation and the development of the legacy. In 1903, the bear's impact led to the creation of New York's Ideal Novelty and Toy Company founded by Michtom and his wife. For decades, toy stores have influenced a generational love for teddy bears and further guided the ways they present within our society and cultures. </p>
<p>In today's age, physical teddy bear plushes are everywhere but we see them represented in a multitude of forms. Very recognizably, teddy bears are often used within media including pop culture and advertisements. It would only be fair to crown Winnie the “Pooh as the No. 1 all-time teddy bear” (Mackie, 2015). Along with another original teddy bear presented in television, the Care Bears, these bears have influenced children and been classic media within society. We see them sewn into clothing, printed onto birthday decorations and even bedding sets. Popularity has continued to grow with each new teddy bear character, and companies started to consistently use teddy bears within their marketing. Many advertisements, specifically toilet paper or laundry commercials, use teddy bears instead of humans. Whether it’s the family of colorful Charmin bears or Snuggle the fabric softener bear, these different teddies are known for “unleashing… unrelenting cuteness upon the world” (Mackie, 2015). I always wondered why these ads used teddy bears instead of actual humans, the people who use the products. It’s interesting to think companies may use this marketing strategy to dim and avoid the disgust surrounding bathroom discussion. It’s a lot more tolerable to society's eyes to see an adored bear using toilet paper as opposed to a human. This challenges taboos and limits sensitivity on bathroom topics. While not everyone may own a teddy bear, they are significantly integrated into our everyday lives through television and products. </p>
<p>Many people place judgements on teenagers or adults owning stuffed animals- or at least I expect them too. Especially since I’ve grown older, I see my teddy bear as more than just a toy. Any embarrassment has left me, as I’ve recognized it as a symbol of my adolescence and innocence, along with my connection to my parents. The faded fur and innumerable seams torn to bits soak in every bit of laughter and tears from my life. The memories from my family road trips to late school nights restless and heartbroken in bed leak from the revealed stuffing remaining. It’s certainly falling apart at this point, considerably too sentimental to repair, and I think that’s what makes it so special to me. I don’t think this is a unique experience, and I can account for that with the immense amount of friends I know owning a baby blanket, stuffed animal, or even a childhood teddy bear. All being well loved, these hold personal significance. Teddy bears in specific, have been culturally seen “as symbols of youth and comfort” (Hull, 2020) for more than one hundred years. Millions of bears are purchased a year, often being gifts, and personally I’ve repeatedly been given them for holidays like my birthday or valentines day (Hull, 2020). They’re even given to those in hospitals, expressing a symbol of love. Along with this, the company and store Build-A-Bear workshop is incredibly popular, bridging the belief that bears are only for children, and instead encouraging the activity of picking and stuffing your own personal and uniquely designed plush. I remember my first experience going to Build-A-Bear like it was yesterday. My parents had always refused to bring me into the big bright store while walking the mall, but my 3rd grade girl scouts field trip finally allowed me to. Walking up and down the aisle, I carefully picked the soft bear skin to add stuffing and a little fabric heart into. We all rubbed, kissed and placed the hearts gently into the bear, making a wish. The ritual itself seems odd, but represents exactly what a teddy bear is within culture. Love, gentleness and comfort. </p>
<p>While maybe you think I’m silly for feeling so connected to my childhood teddy bear, it’s a very common experience. All types of people own and appreciate them, ranging from children whining in a toy store to “soldiers… (carrying) their own teddy bears, tucked into knapsacks” (George, 2023) through wartime. Former president Theodore Roosevelt’s bear hunt was the beginning of this comfort item and the teddy bear name. The irony of it all is that Roosevelt actually “ordered a member of his hunting party to slit” (Green, 2021) the throat of the tied up bear the nation now viewed as innocent and sweet. Regardless, the teddy bear has remained an adored possession and a bright symbol of comfort and nostalgia, and I wholeheartedly believe its legacy will continue on for centuries. I give teddy bears four and a half stars. </p>

<h3>Bibliography</h3>

<p>Holzmann, Sarah. “Discover How President Theodore Roosevelt Inspired the World’s First Teddy Bear, Which Went on Sale on This Day in 1903.” Smithsonian Magazine, Smithsonian, 15 Feb. 2025, www.smithsonianmag.com/smart-news/discover-how-president-theodore-roosevelt-inspired-the-worlds-first-teddy-bear-which-went-on-sale-on-this-day-in-1903-180986052/. Accessed 4 Sept. 2025.</p>

<p>Mackie, Drew. “Ted, Pooh and Paddington, Too: The Top Teddy Bear Stars in Pop Culture.” People.com, PEOPLE, 25 June 2015, people.com/movies/the-best-pop-culture-teddy-bears/. Accessed 4 Sept. 2025.</p>

<p>Hull, Kate. “Culture: Teddy’s Bear - Mountain Outlaw.” Mountain Outlaw, 2020, www.mtoutlaw.com/teddys-bear/. Accessed 9 Sept. 2025.</p>

<p>George, Alice. “The Teddy Bear Was Once Seen as a Dangerous Influence on Young Children.” Smithsonian Magazine, Smithsonian Magazine, Dec. 2023, www.smithsonianmag.com/history/history-teddy-bear-once-seen-dangerous-influence-young-children-180983234/. Accessed 11 Sept. 2025.</p>

<p>Green, John. The Anthropocene Reviewed. E. P. Dutton, An Imprint Of The Penguin Publishing Group, 2021.</p>
