---
layout: single
title: Wearing His Story
permalink: wearing-his-story
header:
  overlay_image: /assets/img/Lawrence,_Kansas_skyline_2018.jpg
  overlay_color: "#000"
  overlay_filter: "0.5"
  #overlay_image: /assets/images/unsplash-image-1.jpg
  # actions:
  #   - label: "Download"
  #     url: "https://github.com/mmistakes/minimal-mistakes/"
  caption: "Photo credit: Ian Ballinger"
---
<h2>Wearing His Story by Brady Bechtel</h2>
<p>I don’t usually remember moments from deep in my childhood to well unless they make a real impact on my life. One of the clearest memories I have is sitting down in section 210 of the United Center on January 2nd, 2017. This was the day I watched Jimmy Butler casually drop 52 points against the Charlotte Hornets. Ever since that day, Jimmy Butler has been a huge role model in my life. The next morning, I opened up my iPhone and searched for a Jimmy Butler jersey online. Most cost upward of $100, slightly out of my price range at the time. I eventually laid my eyes on a stunning blue and pink Miami Vice jersey for the low price of only fifteen dollars. I knew it was fake, but that wasn't at all a problem; that jersey would be my armor for the proceeding years of my life.</p>
<p>What made that Jersey so meaningful to me was the name it had stitched into the back. I didn’t want it because it looked cool or even because I wanted to wear it, but because of who I was supporting and representing when purchasing it. Jimmy was born in Houston to a single mother. By the age of 13, he was kicked out of his home and left homeless. To quote his mother, “His mom told him at 13 years old, ‘I don’t like the look of you. You gotta go” (Bucher). It is not only the fact that Jimmy made it to the NBA, but his journey that he took to get there, that makes his jersey an incredibly sacred item to me.</p>
<p>I'm proud to say I am not alone in my fandom of Jimmy Butler. It may not be mine specifically, but sports jerseys don’t only connect us to the player, but to the rest of the fanbase as well. Almost every time I would wear my jersey out, I would get compliments from other fans. It feels like you have an invisible soul tie to the stranger who just came up to you, truly a feeling unlike any other. The passion that comes with being a die-hard fan is a special kind of energy. I will never forget the Christmas my father got courtside tickets to the Chicago Bulls vs. the Miami Heat at the United Center. I became a fan of Jimmy during his time at the Bulls. Over the years, he had made his way to the Heat, and I had followed him the entire way. After seeing him dominate on the Bulls years prior, watching him take him down on his new team, back where I first saw him, was lining up to be an incredible experience. The bright lights of the stadium struck my eyes as I walked through the VIP entrance to the courtside level of the arena. Feet on the court, I stood proud wearing the opposing team's jersey at the homecourt of my hometeam. My love for that jersey itself ran so deep in my blood that the judgment and chirps I knew I would get wearing it didn’t mean a thing. As I made my way to my seat, the stadium started to fill with red. Bulls jersey after Bulls jersey is all I could see. Scattered in the crowd, I would see the rare Heat fan. As the game progressed, the crowd would erupt every time the Bulls scored, and every time the Heat scored, you could pick out what felt like six people from the crowd of thousands cheering their hearts out. Being one of those six people came with that unreal bond between each other. Hundreds of feet away, the people I would go my whole lifetime without talking to, those wearing jerseys just like mine, felt like brothers.</p>
<p>Looking at the jersey through the Anthropocene lens gives it more of an unusual twist. On the surface, my Jersey is nothing but good. It symbolizes hard work and a significant role model in my life, but at the same time, there is a dark side to it. Knowing it was a cheap knock-off comes with knowing how it was made. Cheap, possibly even unpaid, and unfair labor was most likely used to create my favorite jersey. The global sports apparel industry was valued at over $200 billion as of 2022. The only way for this kind of money to be made is by finding shortcuts wherever you can, allowing items like jerseys to be mass-produced at a mass profit. This contradiction in this item makes it difficult to really understand what is right. To me personally and to other owners across the world, there is deep personal value within the jersey, yet on the surface, it is a cheap piece of polyester manufactured overseas.</p>
<p>Despite the deep look into the item, nothing ever felt better than slipping into it before high-stakes games of driveway basketball with my family. I felt like an absolute unit. It was like a surge of skill flooded my bones every time I took that jersey off the wall, making it even more special. Almost representative of a secret weapon. My friends and family knew my basketball skills, and they were not great, but after I put on that jersey, it was a different story. Whenever I wore it, it also reminded me of the obstacles that had to be overcome for it to exist. As Nick Friedell notes, “Butler still remembers the nights he would bounce between friends’ couches, never sure where he would wake up the next morning" (Friedell). Throughout the years of owning that jersey, my personal feeling towards it grew alongside me. At first, all I saw was a colorful jersey with my favorite player's name on it, but I learned the deeper meaning of the story as I matured. Now today, I feel history repeating itself. As I have read pieces of the book “The Anthropocene Reviewed,” I have learned to take a different point of view on just about everything. I had never once thought about the jersey from the manufacturer's side until now. For all they care, it's just more money, but to me, it is a foundation of my current values.</p>
<p>All in all my Jersey holds meaning beyond what anyone else can see. As I continue to move through my life, I will forever keep Jimmy’s mindset in mind. Colin McEvoy explains that “Butler credits much of his drive to the instability of his childhood, saying it fueled his hunger to prove people wrong” (McEvoy). On the surface one sees a colorful piece of clothing, but by shifting the way you think so much more is uncovered. It represents moments of pride, connection, and identity that shaped the person I am today. With everything comes flaws, and yes there is a darker side to the story, but the sense of community and passion that my jersey and other jerseys around the world bring. It's more than just the fabric and stitching, but it's a piece of who I am.</p>
<p>I rate my Jimmy Butler jersey a 5/5.</p>

<h3>Works Cited</h3>
<p>Bucher, Ric. “Left Alone, Jimmy Butler Has Found NBA Stardom One New Family Member at a Time.” Bleacherreport.com, 2018, bleacherreport.com/articles/2359572-left-alone-jimmy-butler-has-found-nba-stardom-one-new-family-member-at-a-time?. Accessed 2 Sept. 2025.</p>
<p>Friedell, Nick. “Jimmy Butler’s Unusual Path to Becoming a Star - ESPN.” ESPN.com, ESPN, 24 Nov. 2014, www.espn.com/nba/story/_/id/11931211/jimmy-butler-unusual-path-becoming-star?. Accessed 4 Sept. 2025.</p>
<p>McEvoy, Colin. “10 Things You Might Not Know about NBA Superstar Jimmy Butler.” Biography, 27 Apr. 2023, www.biography.com/athletes/a43726991/jimmy-butler-facts?. Accessed 2 Sept. 2025.</p>
